You
So what do you think about the thoughts that having pets increases one's attachments in the world
Well the brief answer it's
Things in the world are not your attachment
It's your attitude towards the things in the world
The same sense the Buddha said
Beautiful things in the world are not are not man's centralities desire and lust towards those things that sensuality is there
So people blaming things for their attachment means people
Not seeing where their attachment is so as long as you blame things for attachment you're gonna be attached
Because the most natural responses when people think I must give up the attachment is to throw away all my possessions and get rid of everything
But that's not freeing you from attachment. That's just obscuring your attitude that you had towards those things
Which means when something else comes your way you're gonna be able to attach to it because you have an undermine that
a mental stance of appropriation
So in terms of pets or family members parents like
Your attachment is your emotional dependence upon those things being present in the world not those things in the world
Because if truly you would need to get rid of the stuff to be free from attachment means you need to go and destroy the whole world
To be free from attachment to the world, but that's not how it works
There are some some things some relationships
Not worthy of having some relationships. Yeah. Yeah. Well sensuality in general
So like if you if you want to have pets in this particular example you well before you do ask yourself why
Are you are you having pets because you generally want to help animals?
We are having pets because you're feeling lonely or bored or you need you need excitement or some novelty or just a cute little pet
Which is most people don't think this through. That's why like the shelter is a full of abandoned animals in the West
Because people would take them in a spur of a moment and then
Afterwards basically when that kind of novelty runs out
You realize it's it's too demanding too much care too. It takes too much time too much effort so much responsibility
Then you just give them
What the places that sort of provide it, but really what you do is just make it someone else's problem and
That all could have been prevented if you if you were a bit
more self-reflexive before you commit it
Obviously you have like things that like your parents or your family for example. You have no choice. You can't give them away
and
So that's why you sometimes you're bound with things that kind of create attachment for you
But it doesn't mean that you're not responsible for the attachment part
Yeah, you're not responsible for being paired with these people or those this to your family or song
But you are responsible if you're emotionally attached upon it
But if you think that you can free yourself from attachment just by dismissing these people or these things in the world
You're so you have like serious the mistake and basically
The attachment giving it up. It's much subtler than that
So if somebody has a pet
And they see that they are quite emotionally attached to it
What should they do if they want to be themselves? Well, basically they should
They should contemplate the death of that pet
as much as they can
Without abandoning it without stopping like
We're drawing care for it and helping it, but you just have to keep reminding yourself
To the point of view where you become sort of when you go emotionally above it above the floor
That this thing that is this pet this friend or whatever whatever attitude you have towards it
It's gonna go you will go you might die use it for it
And it will it will
It's unpleasant. That's what people are kind of either or
Either I'll be fully invested emotionally or are completely dismiss it and throw it away and not have anything to do with it
Because I'm afraid of my attachment. The fact that you're afraid you might get attached means you're not free
From possibility of attachment means you're not free from nature of attachment
And that's the problem that's not a problem
And like you you might you can give away the pet there will be other things you then attach attached to
So really you want to recognize the problem and then see okay
There are certain things that are not necessary a certain degree of involvement is not necessary
And you've been doing it purely out of attachment
Now when you become aware of the attachment you will naturally be draw yourself to a certain degree
But there is all blanket rule how much you must be withdrawn from the world and from your engagements different people
Measure these things differently
The engagement means different things for them or some people can take more of it some people can't
So that that should not be the criteria
Like how many pets you have for example or how many charities you support
No criteria should be how much of the attachment is there in regard to it
And in regard to animals still do you think it's best to leave them alone
Not interfere as a human being
I think there's universal law you can do whatever you like basically doesn't mean you won't pay the price for it
You know if you're in a position to help why wouldn't you?
I mean even the Buddha himself said giving even to an animal
Or not even to a specific animal just throwing away food and saying
Made those animals and creatures that feed on this food feed on this food that are thrown away
That would bring you merit and and sort of like a good reward for your actions
Let alone let alone helping helping
Helping humans or helping greater number of animals and so on
But yeah, you don't have to do it. You don't have to do any of it. It's not like you must help. No, you don't
But aren't they some people think that animals are happier
When they're not around human beings
Yeah, they might think that and what they should do is ask themselves. Why do they think that?
And you probably want to find out that they think it because they want to find the justification for them not helping animals in the first place
Like when they are in position to do when they wouldn't even necessarily be attached to it even they help them
And they still don't do it. And then they would find oh, well, that's whatever they say that that's their karma
They deserve it basically and that's just ridiculous
Even if they do deserve it that still has nothing to do with you choosing to not help somebody in need of help animal or human
Now if you don't help, yeah, you don't have to feel guilty
It's it's you know, it's really up to you to do whatever you want
But if you're self-honest and if you question your motive, you'll see that usually not helping is rooted in unwholesome motives
Either it will dismiss or can't be bothered can't live in care or too lazy or whatever
And if you're aware of it, you wouldn't want it
What about newturing?
Sorry, what about newturing newturing the animals your pets so they can't have
They can't work
Well, of course now to answer that question obviously it would
Depends what what point of view you come from but obviously as as somebody who practices the dharma
And a Buddhist person. It's probably the best thing you can do for an animal
Because animals stay animals as in the remain bound to central animal central realm
Because all the thoughts all the actions revolve around senses
Around animal intentions around cravings sexuality food fighting is constantly driven
And because of that, it's so hard to break
Hearts of the animal river and that's what the Buddha said
It takes like a blind and similar for blind turtle coming up to the top of the sea top of the ocean once every 500 years
And there is a yoke a piece of wood with a hole in it
It's been sort of thrown and floating left and right thrown by the winds and the waves
And this this blind turtle that comes from the bottom once 500 years
Has a greater chance of sticking its head through that hole in that little piece of wood
It's being thrown constantly then a being that has fallen into an animal realm has a chance of coming back to human realm
Why because you look at them whatever they do it's bound with the animal realm entirely
So they cannot have things sort of
Like a full of the nature that would then result in a higher river
So why neutering is good is because
animals can't restrain themselves the only way they can restrain themselves is if that's
That restraint is placed externally mind you that's true for most of humans
But we speak about animals so basically the lucky animal is the one that has properly strained placed upon it
Externally as in by a human not like violence no violence
No, so like neutering them as we're done with these dogs
You saw the the massive difference is like they don't think about sexuality anymore
And you do remember when they did think about it
Well, like a madness would come over the mind
Which means all the actions they'll be committing on account of it are very very unwholesome and they have no
They don't have enough self-reflection to see that
So in a way they're victim victims, but they're victims of their own actions and that's why it keeps repatriating itself
So the lucky dog for example or a cat or whatever the one that you knew to means you took that very powerful
Unwholesome dimension out of their existence basically
Sexuality craving fighting I mean raping it's horrible, but when they get into the mating the heat
It's just violence when you look on the roads and streets and they lose perspective as well completely
Come back malnourished ripped apart because they were fighting for dominance and whatnot
Everything just unholesome on top of their wholesome and now you're new to them and that whole dimension is gone
They can't even think about it anymore that one act upon it
So you could see that in an animal realm which could be considered a darker realm as in all the actions are bound with centrality and ill will and craving and fear and so on
Having an absence of the same amount of bad actions can actually mean a lot of positive
In the same sense with the Buddha said in the darker realms even just like a fleeting thought a positive thought
Uh even even even very fleeting in the nature can mean a lot why because there isn't any
So it would really stand out and it would then bring those those beings back up to high realms where they can
become aware of their self-reflection
And consequently that's where they would have said the people who live their life unrestrained
Don't even keep the five precepts and basically just follow every single desire that they have
Scratch ditch whenever it reaches
Uh they're not different than animals and usually that's the realm they're heading their behavior is taking that
When you just react upon any impulse that comes your way
And completely are unaware due to your own obscuring unaware of the responsibility that you actually inherently carry
For your own choices and your own freedom
So that's why I mean people don't have to help anyone
But you should really ask yourself if you choose not to help well ask yourself why why did you make that choice
Why was it rooted? Was it really carelessness laziness hatred whatever just put find it up
So is there any other way that you could help animals if you wanted to other than
I mean you might want to do that as well. Right. Well, I think obviously just
Uh providing like feeding them for example means there'll be less on on on that verge of hunger
They will they will make them edgy
And uh and then in a fighting mode and and and greedy and stealing and so on
Some things sure vaccinations so you'll help them obviously like if you can but shelter
Providing shelter providing medicine providing food then if you have the ability train them a bit
Just make them wait for the food
Literally, that's something that people could benefit from
I eat whenever I feel an urge to put something my mouth basically not when I'm hungry
And actually the Buddha did say that in one of the suitors that in some regard
animals are actually
More virtues than most of the like the contemporary people at the time
Said they would mate only when there was basically a season when a female would be in the season
But at the time when we were saying that you would have these these rich people would have like many for many wives and just
constantly having sexual intercourse left and right
Without a purpose just
So
So purpose was sent
The
The other thing that the Buddha did say was in regards to the same sort of uh, sutra was the um
Yeah, like the animals would eat when they're hungry the dogs
But then you had people like like a
Growing wealth and just not sharing and just eating whenever they wanted just holding it
It's being greedy basically so in that regard animals are more restrained
But obviously, you know sexuality is a big part in every being sort of life
And certainly can be a great motivator which always results in unwholesome proliferation of desire
Which is then responsible for your rebirth and actions you committed an account of it
So so do just just helping animals in that sense
You would basically prevent the whole the whole domain of attachment for them
On account of which you'll be doing lots of lots of unwholesome actions
Like even for a female dog as well
I mean first of all you help in not going through that whole
Process of being basically gangraved by the bunch of by a pack of dogs
Which is how you might not happen when people are kind of carefully breeding dogs
But when you look out on the road, it's like 10 males and it's just battlefield
Two weeks for two weeks are just crying and abuse horrible and then on top of it
Puppies children are the greatest attachment and it's no different for animals
So people think oh you're depriving these animals of happiness. Yeah, well that happiness is just like 1%
On top of the 99% of pain and exposure to pain
But not just that she can barely fend for herself and provide for herself like a stray dog
For example, I say six puppies to feed and you see that when you see the stray dog with puppies
When she starts breastfeeding, it just
turns into this completely emensiated sort of skeleton but within a week
Because they don't get enough and then you think that's pleasant
That's pleasant for the dog and for the puppies it is and it's just completely the opposite just torture
And most of the puppies will end up dying
And and probably the mother as well if not if she doesn't die clearly it's gonna take her like half a year
To recover to the fur back and health back by which time she's gonna get pregnant again
And then again and it's just a constant sort of
being subjected to just a constant
Pressure and and striving and greed and fear and fighting
Yeah, and you remove that and it's just a happy dog
And what if what if your dogs get
Get very sick
And one of them I in a lot of pain
There's no cure
Would you consider euthanate
No, of course not
They'll die anyway, we're all gonna die anyway
Um
To think if if a dog were to have a choice to do it itself
Yeah, I wouldn't feel really either
But they don't
Which means you'll be killing it
Even if it was a lot of pain doesn't matter
because
The pains that you can perceive
And someone else dying might not be anything in comparison to the pains of a being actually dying
In other words, like it might look painful, but it's still alive
But when it actually starts dying, that's the worst type of pain and that is according to the Buddha
But usually people judge this situation based on how they feel or I can't bear to watch this so I'll kill it
Compassionately, I'll put it out of my misery pretty much. Yeah, I'll put it out of my misery
Yeah, that's that's how it should read
I mean again, you can do whatever you want, but don't deceive yourself. You are killing it
But what about like dog shelters like they get always stray dogs. Yeah, I give it 20,000 dogs
They're killing it
But
I mean obviously they're responsible for the act of guessing them
And whatever means they use but whoever gives their dog to a shelter is also responsible for killing them
If they end up being killed because they wouldn't have ended being killed if you didn't put them in a shelter, they'd kill dogs
So that's why I mean think twice before you actually choose to act and commit and do things
In any area of life
But people's judgment basically it's usually emotional which is not really a judgment
It's more a reaction. I want this habit and then I'm only going to look at the reasons for having it
I'm not going to stop and think about and maybe be patient and see if I change my mind or if I really throw this through
And not just for the pets in general, in general
So that's get you really
So another question that usually comes up for a lot of people
How can monastics be withdrawn from central pleasures if they are using the internet
The internet for it's a very sensual thing
Right so
How do you have to use the internet for some reason? Yeah, you use it for that particular reason
Basically internet is a tool
So if you use tool to gain sensuality, yeah, but you don't blame the tool you blame your own central intentions and your own central actions
You cannot engage in sensuality without having sort of
Without perceived it as a sensual as a sensual
A desire as a central outcome that you want to pursue
Which means sensuality is always intentional you can't accidentally stumble like engage in sensuality
So the question here, it's not like whether you should use internet or not the question is are you restrained or not?
If you're not restrained, then yeah, you should foresee these circumstances
They might tempt you further and then you avoid it
But even then you don't place responsibility on avoidance of these things
Because the real problem is you not having a food sensuality
So you might avoid internet all you want, but you can still spend your time with sensual thoughts, sensual cravings
living on top of a mountain
And be equally bound by it
Even one day you have to use the internet well sooner or later something will happen where you're going to be exposed to things
They used to cause you
Basically sensual desire and you're going to have it again because you haven't done anything about it
You can't spend your whole life in hiding
And there was that very nice suit, the similarly of the bait, the deer herd that we talked about
Well, like most people would
The hunter places the food that has a bait in it
And that's basically like a description of, similarly for sensuality
It baits you to become sort of engaged with it and attached just because of that promised pleasure
So the most people would be sort of careless and they'll just be eating it together with a bait
They wouldn't even see it as a problem, they wouldn't even see the bait
Then there's a group of people who recognize that and then say, okay, we need to restrain ourselves
Because that's basically, but they can't draw a line between a food and a bait
So then they dismiss the entire domain of food
And they would have said, they're like a deer herd that runs on top of a mountain and then they live there
But sooner or later the food will, whatever they've been living on in the mountain will dry out
And then they will come back to the same environment that they despised
And they would eat carelessly, they wouldn't see the bait and they would remain the same as the first herd
And then the third one would be basically the one who's seen the first, seen the second
And then they realize actually we must not shun the food
We just have to learn how to eat it carefully without engaging with the bait, without being hooked
And that's the whole point
But that refers to basically avoiding sensuality
Not like flirting with sensuality and carefully so you don't get no
Flirting with sensuality means you're basically already hooked
But learning how to eat carefully or in other words learning how to be restrained and seeing where your responsibility is
Because that's what I mean, like people would blame the food, blame the internet, blame this
Blame the city, blame the environment, but that's not a problem
The problem is your attitude of sensuality in regard to it
So if you recognize that that's on you, your exercise is restrained to the right degree
And then you could see genuinely, oh this is a tool, this can be used wholesomely
Obviously this cannot be used wholesomely
Things like sexual intercourse, they're fully already perverted by the desire
Which means you can't do it rightly, you have to abandon it altogether
So if a person does have problem with a restraint, sure
So minimize your exposure to things, they're the challenging you, but don't project your responsibility on to those things
It's a new
You have to see it, your weakness
Well exactly, you have to see it and then you have to see what the problem is
The problem is not the internet, the problem is not the central objects
The problem is your sensuality in regard to it
And you're not going to approve that just by dismissing the central objects
Or the objects that could potentially result in central outcome
And if you start clarifying that, then yeah, then you are developing enough space basically to see
And to move about without taking things up in central manner
And you become quite strong because you can withstand the possibilities
Well, not just withstand, you actually are uprooted
The possibility of you centrally engaging in central possibilities
And that's when you know you're beyond sensuality
That's like no amount of central objects will become a temptation anymore
Because the mind has fully seen and discerned the danger of sensuality
And the inherent basically repulsiveness of it
Being a victim to your own desire, you fully understood that
And that's, and by doing so you have abandoned it
So then you can't actually engage with it, like it's inconceivable
The Buddha would say it's like as if a man would sort of eat some delicious food
And then he would vomit it out
And that would he have a desire to eat that vomit again
He just wouldn't think inconceivable, would be repelled by the thought of it
So you said earlier about how to overcome attachments like to your dogs or to a pet
I mean, to contemplate the possibility inevitable possibility of their death
And to free from attachment
When I say contemplate, I mean allow yourself to emotionally feel the significance of those things
Not like explain to yourself just basically to appease your own emotional disturbance
At the thought of your favorite pet dying or something
No, don't go out of the old diet and then you start explaining
You actually want to take it on that emotional level
Basically to not be afraid to feel the death of the loved ones
And there will basically pressure your mind into growth
Your mind will have to grow out of it
Or it will have to succumb to it
It reminds me of what you're saying this morning about
being intoxicated with youth and intoxicated with health and talking to the judge
It's it's well, thank you for granted your own life
You start taking for granted lives of other things, beings, or animals or humans
Which means death even a notion of it is going to be frightening
To you, to your emotional equilibrium is going to be a challenge
So unless you recognize that as a problem, you can't sort of grow out
You can't develop yourself out of it, you just can't
Because you've gone all of your efforts will be about covering it up
Well, we all died and none of that, all of that is done just to prevent you from taking it on personally
But if you if you start questioning basically just
Well, the validity of that assumption, like why do I mean, yeah, we will all die
So why don't I imagine that I might be dead by this afternoon or maybe even tomorrow?
Like why would I why would I just assume that my life is ahead of me
Or my health or my youth
And if you start questioning these things on the level of of yourself
Means you are automatically affecting any attachment that you had depending upon those things in regard to others
In other words, if you become fully aware of your own mortality, you cannot be attached to other person's life
Doesn't mean you become like a blind oblivious robotic creature
No, you're still full aware of the significance of life
Of helping animals or caring after people or whatever
But none of that causes that emotional intoxication of of of assumption that this will last forever
Which means when it changes when it goes away different to the way you expected it and hopeful
So you won't be affected by it
Your perspective will remain basically
Undiminished it just would not change
Because it wasn't dependent upon that anymore
And that's the true meaning of being free from attachment and freedom
Not like not recognizing the significance of, you know, dying loved ones or something like that
No, on the contrary being fully able to let it arise to the extent
It wants to arise and you won't have to do anything about it
You don't have to jump into grief, break down into tears
You're able to hold it and keep perspective in regard to it
As those enlightened people in the sutras would say like
How could it be otherwise when they were facing somebody dying the good friend or mother, father, whatever
It would be just like
How could it be otherwise? How could a thing that has a reason or dying?
It's no surprise. It wasn't surprise. No, it's well. It's surprising to think that it can be otherwise
That's a surprise for those who cannot think that anyway
That's very much
Those are very much in this
Think about
Premeditate
Yeah, think about death think about loss of health
Agee
Yeah, the right thing you basically
The right thought people people think right thought will come out for tennis the other some sort of magical experience
No, right thought will come up if you stop engaging
nurturing and maintaining the wrong thought
And the wrong thought is any thought of greed aversion delusion any thought that
It's based upon assumption that perpetuates these gratuitous assumptions and intoxications
Meet your life with your health. I mean people think just like when they're healthy, you think you're never going to get sick
And then just the thought that you might get sick freaks you out all the way
It's like nothing. There's no no no safe zone in between
It's like when people get a flu. They just full-on
Panic they want every medicine from the shelf
Doctor to give them just just to get rid of this discomfort because it's threatening to my existential assumption of
Of an indefinite health. All right, whatever
Purple on the face. Oh, yeah, sure sure a pimple on the face. Oh, it's like what a
Or a hair going the other way you don't want it to go something just interfering with your perception of yourself
And it's like bothering you on that existential level. No, it's not like it's not optional
You can't remain indifferent towards you are being emotionally oppressed
And you're doing it yourself basically
By maintaining those assumptions that when then they when they're challenged by the circumstances of the world they go against
Your your your desires basically. Yeah, you cannot remain in depth. You are affected
So suffering is as the bullet described in the most general term basically not getting what what what what one wants
And being paired with things that one doesn't want
In brief basically you there's five ugly ties in your experiences a whole attachment to it in any shape or form
That's why suffering is there
Actually, I was going to ask
This question you touched and touched in a bit is how to improve your thinking how to make your thinking clearer
and right
Think about the right things right deeply. Well, that's that's the thing the first step is to
To get a hint at least that actually this might be a valuable thing to do learn how to think properly
Then if you do then you can start looking closer and then basically see
What is what are the things that are sort of against right mindful thinking?
Essential desire is by giving into central desire to the emotional needs you are compromising your own reason
not some people do more some people do less but
Nevertheless, that's in common to every time you give into desire or or need for emotional satisfaction
Or central satisfaction to that degree you compromise your reason you compromise your mindfulness
Even if you're actually contemplating in pre meditating heart engaging centrality
That's not done in that rifle manner because it's not founded upon mindfulness and self-awareness
You are projected towards a project of sensuality or whatever else
So so recognizing what what goes against
You can't compose mindful thinking clear clear clarity exactly foggy
foggy obtuse
Of fake whatever it's all against it. So ill will anger. It's it's against it
engaging in angry behavior
Cultivating ill will and hatred you are basically obscuring your own perspective on yourself
Same with centrality
Same with distraction in general. You just want to do something because you're bored
Boredom is actually clarity and that's why people fear it
Because it reveals things that you don't want to admit to yourself yet. They're always there
That's why people always need things to do. It's essentially they depend upon constant
Performing of action and finding meaning in random things just to make them do stuff because
It basically keeps you keeps you floating or so it seems
If you run out of things to do if you run out of even the most
frivolous prep frivolous purpose
You basically feel like you begin to sink
But the problem with that whole
Set the whole view is the sooner or later you won't be able to do things
And what you're going to have left is that which will be running away from your whole life
That's why old age is very unpleasant
Because the body stops listening. You lost your health. You lost your strength. You lost your youth
The senses are failing. You can't get distracted now through beautiful sides. You can't even appreciate it anymore
It just hurts to look hurts to hear it. It's not present eating
And what's your left is yourself
That's what you're left with and that's something you didn't want to be with your whole life
And that's why you've been using the intoxication with intoxication with health
Youth and life and sensuality in general just to keep sort of surfing
On top of it without having to face what's underneath
There's a lot of clarity
Awareness
Constantable awareness
Can be very painful. Is that boredom?
It's very painful because clarity. Well clarity is not painful, but it reveals
The painful background and that background is painful only because you're resisting it
Only because your habits of your life
The ones you've been engaging with are the ones that are taking you away from it
namely sensuality
Just following your desires for granted
wanting
To have whatever your desire basically directs you directs you at and because of that
Not engaging that behavior is being painful
So you created a pain
Of boredom
As in boredom you create a boredom because you don't want it
Boredom in itself
It's not neutral
Sorry, it's neutral. It's not unpleasant. It's not the present or unpleasant
That's what would I say if you understand neutral feeling
It is felt as pleasant
If you don't understand it as in if you're still
Basically affecting it with assumptions and and and frequency notions and habits of sensuality
Then it's going to feel unpleasant
Feeling nothing is going to feel unpleasant. It's going to feel threatening basically
So do if you have any
practices
to clear ones
Well physically restraint
Not not engaging in distracted behavior sensory strain
Not not engaging in in basically like
Yeah, you have to stop for example drinking being careless taking drugs
Because that certainly it's it's directly opposed to any clarity that you can maintain in your mind
Then at the same time
You also have to understand that the real clarity comes from understanding what clarity is
Not from what feels clear
That's inevitable beginning. We all start based on how we feel
But you want to transcend it. You don't want to just be bound by how you feel and what you deem pleasant or unpleasant
Because what people don't understand the clarity then they're just going to be pursuing that which they think clarity is
Which is that which they deem agreeable
not necessarily understood
And that's when you have people overdoing the practice of clarity
Trying to catch every single moment and things like that, but that's a contradiction in terms
You have to catch a moment you have to be outside of the moment
But if you're outside of the moment the moment is not in your experience
So you're just chasing these hollow contradictory ideas on account to develop clarity
So clarity is basically absence of greed aversion delusion
If those things are not present in your experience, you don't have to then get rid of whatever else it's present
Because all you care about is the unwholesome aspect
But people usually can't
Can't see where the line is so then they try to dismiss it all in the same sense when I we spoke just earlier
Attachment is a problem. So I'll throw away everything
Baby and the boss work the whole thing. Oh, I'm attached to this. I'm as destroyed. I must get rid of it
I must give it up. That's how I free myself from my attachment where you want
And the Buddha realized that when he came to the point of even trying to give up his own life because thinking that's the way out
But then he realized it wasn't only gonna result in the dying unenlightened
When he tried to stop his own breathing basic because of what I'm reading. I'm helping this life. That's a base of attachment
Unfortunately, he didn't he saw through it and then he realized that actually no this only resulted in me being dead nothing lies in
so
Abandoned things that are unnecessary
With a basically a full proliferation of and carelessness in regard to centrality ill will
Restraint and moderation
And then tried to understand that clarity don't ever do it either
And or mystified
What about
Concentrating on a neutral object
Would that take away all the unhulsing objects?
Well, no because concentration for people today means absorption and if you're absorbing to something means you're not aware of yourself
So how can develop self-reflection and self-clarity?
If the basic premise of yourself being present and seeing that in the situation is not there
That's why most of the contemporary meditation meditation techniques are completely misleading
No doubt that a novelty experiences in peace come out of it
But that peace is also peace at the cost of self-reflection
Which means it's a it's a piece that's peaceful only because it's agreeable
Not because it's a genuine clarity or contains wisdom
It's only because it's a I find it agreeable
And that's why often
It ceases to be enough as well so that people need to do it harder for me harder
To get more of that novelty back that's going to be a peaceful feeling
But that's not the piece you want it's basically peace within the central domain and that's not peaceful
But the power of concentration
Yeah
You don't want power to concentration you want power of reflection
And then come the right concentration will come out of that
Because you you don't again
When a person is committing to some practice of concentration or account of the model and foggy and obtuse thinking
No clarity of their thinking can arise
Why because that that's basically
The tools they're using to develop their concentration are the ones affected by ignorance
And if you're not seeing that whatever you gain through them, it's just going to share the same nature
Because people who think that what as long as I practice concentration of any kind
That will transfer itself and I'll benefit from it in in other like spiritual development
You want that development that you think it's spiritual. It's really the central which is why yeah
Most people's practice of spirituality is very much central
It's a practice of sensuality
Attaining physical experiences
Yeah, yeah, exactly physical basically obtaining agreeable experiences without trying to see
Your motivation behind it or like fully understanding the nature that those experiences
And you could say that any spiritual practice today, it's basically just spiritualizing sensuality
It's true spiritual practice comes in you undoing the sensuality
And then seeing what's there already
Without you needing to have a desire for it or inspiration or whatever some sort of
Spiritual uplifting
That's why that's why if the dhamma is done rightly the Buddhist teachings are rightly
Like nobody can stumble upon it by accident. Don't do some miraculous experience
It's done through development. It's achieved through development and basically hard work
That's why they would just praise the diligence self-reflection
Not tolerating on wholesome states that you know are present in you
And you're tolerating them by tolerating them you give rise to motivation that's rooted in them
By giving rise to that sooner or later you're gonna act out of it
So you end up being fully responsible for for the perpetuation of your own ignorance and lack of freedom
Oh
It's not enough room
He's job visible. Yeah
I only have one lap
Come on get him get him
Get him. She's coming